June 1, 2016 ECEN 4623/5623
RT Embedded Systems
Lecture 1 – Introduction
Part-4 – Terminology Guide

# Actuator

Electro-mechanical device which converts analog or digital electrical
inputs into mechanical energy interacting with the physical world.
 
# ADC

Analog to Digital Converter, encodes analog signals into digital
values.  Aperiodic – lacking a distinguishable frequency or period,
having irregular occurrence. Faults and processing exceptions are in
real-time systems are aperiodic due to unpredictability of when or how
often they might occur.
 
# API

Application Programmer’s Interface, provides function call interface
to lower level software and/or hardware functionality.
 
# Anytime Algorithm

Anytime algorithms generate the best answer given available
information that has been processed since service request up to a
deadline for response. The answer generated by the algorithm is an
approximation of the correct answer at the deadline.
 
# Application Executive

Also known as a Cyclic Executive, a main loop program that calls
functions on a periodic sub-rate of the main loop period.
 
# Asynchronous

An event or stimulus that occurs at any point in time rather than at
known predictable points in time - e.g. an external interrupt may
occur at any time and will immediately change the thread of execution
on a CPU.
 
# Asynchronous Logic

Digital logic that is not globally clocked, but rather changes state
based on edge triggering in a combinational logic circuit or edge
triggered by multiple independent clocks.
 
# Atomic Operation - A non-interruptable CPU instruction

I.e any instruction that can be fetched and completed before the CPU
can be interrupted.
 
# Autonomic

A network of organized, "smart" computing components that give us what
we need, when we need it, without a conscious mental or even physical
effort - this new view of computing will necessitate changing the
industry's focus on processing speed and storage to one of developing
distributed networks that are largely self-managing, self-diagnostic,
and transparent to the user - IBM
 
# Bandwidth

Data transfer per unit time, e.g. bytes/second.
 
# BDM

Background Debug Mode, an variant of JTAG that allows data and
instructions to be clocked into and out of a 10-pin interface to a
processor.
 
# Best Effort

Scheduling policy that does not guarantee any particular response time
for a service request, but attempts to make progress on all such
requests and maximize total throughput.
 
# Binary Semaphore

A semaphore that has only 2 states: full and empty; a take on an empty
binary semaphore will block the calling thread and a take on a full
binary semaphore will change the state to empty; a give on an empty
binary semaphore will change the state to full and a give on a full
semaphore has no effect.
 
# Black-Box Test

A set of test vectors and driver that operate only on the functional
interface of a subsystem or system with no knowledge of the internal
workings or execution paths in the case of software.
 
# Block Transfer

Transfer of data (typically contiguous, but may be a scatter/gather
list) that includes multiple memory words/bytes on a bus with
automatic addressing of each element in the block - rather than
addressing and performing a full bus cycle to transfer each word.
 
# Blocking

When a thread of execution has been dispatched on the CPU for
execution, but it needs some other resource such as memory access, an
I/O interface, or some other external condition to be true such that
it must give up the CPU and wait, the thread is said to be blocked.
 
# Block-Oriented Driver

A software I/O device interface which enables memory blocks to be
transferred to an from the I/O device - rather than one memory word at
a time.
 
# Boot Code

Software that is the very first to execute after a processor is reset
and hardware sets the PC (program counter) to an initial address for
execution - boot normally completes after initializing fundamental
resources such as memory, cache, memory mapped devices, installing
interrupt vector handlers, initializing basic critical I/O devices and
disabling others, … finally loading a higher level program or RTOS
kernel image and then jumping to its entry point.
 
# Bottom Half (BH)

Software interfacing to I/O device hardware which services interrupts
related to the device, provides basic configuration and control,
monitors status, and buffers I/O data - the Top Half makes a Bottom
Half usable for application software. Note that Linux normally defines
the BH and TH opposite of the definition provided here.
 
# BSP

Board Support Package, the boot code and basic I/O interface
initialization code needed by an RTOS to boot and cycle on an embedded
system board.
 
# BSS - uninitialized global C program data

Because the data is not initialized, this data need not take up space
in non- volatile memory, but must be allocated a data segment in
working main memory.
 
# Bt878

Brooktree Video/Audio encoder which can digitize an
 
# NTSC input Burst Transfer

A bus transaction which involves an initial address cycle followed by
many data read/write cycles terminated by the bus master (similar to
Block Transfer, but of unlimited length).
 
# Bus

A parallel interface for reading/writing data words from/to addresses
and includes: digital data lines, address lines, and control lines -
note that address and data lines may be multiplexed rather than
separate lines.
 
# Bus Master

A device which can initiate bus cycles to address a targe device and
then read/write data to the target device which supplies data or
receives data.
 
# Bus Analyzer

A passive device which snoops on a bus to capture a record of all bus
cycles - typically acts like a specialized logic analyzer and can be
setup to trigger and start collecting a bus cycle trace when a
particular address, data, or control bit pattern is active on the bus.
Byte-Oriented Driver - a device interface which provides the ability
to read/write single words/bytes to and from the I/O device one at a
time.
 
# C (in RMA)

The execution time required by a service to provide a response not
including any time spent blocking (only time where the CPU was in fact
being used to compute a response output).
 
# Cache

High speed access memory which typically can be read or written in a
single CPU cycle, but due to high cost per storable word, is used as
an efficient copy of a much larger main memory device - hardware
functionality is typically included to aid with cache memory
management including maintenance of cache/memory coherency, mapping of
main memory addresses to cache lines (Direct Mapped, Set Associative,
Fully Associative), and loading/write-back of data between cache and
main memory.
 
# Cache Coherency

A cached copy of data at a given address will be different than the
data at the same address in main memory after a cached write to this
address - when this happens the cache control hardware/software must
restore agreement between the data in cache and main memory sometime
before data would otherwise be corrupted. Two main policies are used
to maintain coherency - write-back and write-through - however, when
memory addresses are cached and also used for DMA or other types of
I/O, special care must also be taken by application code to ensure
that data is not corrupted by intelligently performing write-backs and
re- loads of cache lines as needed.
 
# Cache Hit

When a read or write is performed by an application on data cached at
the address accessed/updated, then this is said to be a cache hit.
 
# Cache Miss

When a read or write is performed by an application on data that is
not presently in cache and therefore the CPU must first load the data
at the address being accessed/modified, this is said to be a cache
miss.
 
# Cache Line Eviction

A system event where data that is written back to memory, freeing up a
cache line.
 
# Cache Line Invalidation

A system event where a cache line is marked, typically with a status
bit called “dirty”, which indicates that the cache line must be
reloaded from memory before data is read from it.
 
# Cache Line Locking

Many caches have control features allowing a program to lock a
particular address into a line of cache preventing this line from
being replaced when other addresses are loaded (makes most sense for
set associative caches rather than direct mapped) - cache line size
varies, but is often 16-64 bytes.
 
# Cache Line Pre-fetch

Many caches have a feature allowing a program to request the cache to
load a cache line despite the fact that the associated address has not
been accessed yet - the idea is that this address will eventually be
accessed in the future and rather than stalling the CPU pipeline at
the time it is accessed, intelligent applications can plan ahead.
 
# Cache Miss Penalty

The number of CPU core cycles that the CPU pipeline must be stalled
when a cache line must be loaded after a cache miss in order for a
thread of execution to continue.
 
# Call-back

A programming technique where a pointer to a function is passed to a
different function (registered) so that the function which obtains
this pointer can call the function passed to it by reference later
on - a technique commonly used in user interfaces so that an event
such as a mouse click can be handled generically by code which however
will call any number of user application callbacks when the mouse
click event is detected.
 
# Canonical Service

A coding style template used for a real- time service provided by an
RTOS task or thread. This style may vary, but at a minimum includes a
main loop which executes as long as the service is “in service” and
has a code section which either polls for input or synchronously or
asynchronously waits for a service request.
 
# Ceiling

The ceiling is a mathematical operation that can be performed on a
real number (floating point) - the ceiling(n) is the closest integer
whole number greater than or equal to n - e.g. ceiling(1.1) = 2. (note
that floor(1.0) = ceiling(1.0) assuming that the significance is 1,
which is the the typical definition of floor and ceiling unless
otherwise noted).
 
# CFD

Control Flow Diagram, a diagram used in Structured Analysis/Design
which indicates where control signals in the system originate, where
they terminate and how they change the flow of data and/or the
processing of data in a DFD. (Note that a CFD is typically a subset of
a DFD which shows both data flow and control flow).


# Chaining Interrupt Service Routine

A chaining ISR is an ISR which calls more than one handler for the
very same interrupt source and priority - a technique often used in
software when a hardware interrupt line is shared by multiple
devices. (Note that most chaining ISRs also perform ISR polling).
 
# Check-Stop

When an error condition on a CPU that can not be handled and further
execution by the CPU is considered either dangerous or impossible,
then the CPU hardware may enter a state known as check-stop where it
ceases to fetch and execute instructions and can only leave this state
via a reset - e.g. a detectable memory error that can not be corrected
normally causes the CPU to enter check-stop.
 
# Circuit Swtiched I/O

An I/O channel that is dedicated to one and only one data source and
sink - often the channel may be point-to-point, but may be switched
before the circuit is established.
 
# Cirrus Crystal 4281

An audio encoder/decoder used in ECEN 4623/5623.
 
# CLI

Command Line Interface, a simple ASCII terminal type interface that
can operate over serial or any other byte-stream I/O interface to
provide the ability to command a device and obtain basic status
information.  Closed-Loop (Feedback) Control System – A control system
which compensates for disturbances by measuring the output response,
feeding the measurement back, and comparing the response to the input
at a summing junction. Any difference between the output and measured
response is driven to zero by actuators which drive the plant to make
corrections.
 
# CODEC - Coder/decoder

A device that converts analog signals to digital to be read by a
computer or transmitted over a network, and converts the digital
signals back to analog. Sound cards and video cards use this kind of
codec. Also, compression/decompression - a two-step process used on
very large multimedia files. Files are compressed for storage and then
expanded to their original size in order to play them back on the
computer.
 
# Completion Test

This necessary and sufficient scheduling feasibility test is based
upon the Sha, Lehoczky, and Ding theorem - documented in the Briand
and Roy reference book used in ECEN 4623/5623.
 
# Computational Complexity

The mathematical magnitude of operations required to successfully
execute a given algorithm - e.g. searching a data set can take N
operations for N items linearly searched or log(N) operations for a
balanced tree search of N items, or even constant C operations for N
items with a perfect hashing function.
 
# Context Switch

When a CPU is multiplexed (shared) by more than one thread of
execution and the scheduler provides preemption, when the scheduler
does preempt a thread in order to dispatch another, it must save state
information associated with the currently executing thread
(e.g. register values including PC) so that this thread can later be
dispatched again to restore its thread of execution without a state
error.  The process of preempting a running task in response to an
interrupt or kernel event followed by dispatch of a new task is a
Context Switch. In some scenarios a thread will exit, suspend or enter
a delayed or pending state and will yield the CPU which will be
followed by a dispatch of another thread from the ready queue – this
is also considered a context switch despite the lack of a priority
preemption of an executing thread.
 
# Context Switch Overhead

The number of machine code instructions (and clock cycles) that an
RTOS scheduler must execute to perform a context switch.
 
# Continuous Media

I/O stream that requires isochronal deliver of data between a source
and sink - e.g. video stream, audio stream, and possibly a telemetry
stream.
 
# Control Flow

A control flow is a CFD unidirectional association between two
processes and/or external entities that indicates an asynchronous
mechanism used to control a process or data source/sink.
 
# Control Plane

The bus or network transport and memory buffer path for control flow
in an architecture which strictly separates data and control. Control
data and commands are processed to determine data flow parameters,
context, and sequencing in the separated data plane.

# Cooperative Scheduling 

A method for scheduling threads of execution through the threads
themselves which make calls to transfer from one thread execution
context to another rather than relying upon a centralized scheduler.
 
# Coverage Criteria

When unit tests and/or system tests are completed on software,
coverage criteria define the completeness of the testing by specifying
the percentage of execution paths, statements, conditions, and
decisions that must be covered.

# Control System 

A system consisting of subsystems and processes (plants) assembled for
the purpose of controlling the outputs of the process.
 
# CPI

Clocks Per Instruction, a measure of CPU efficiency with the ideal
that a CPU pipeline should have a CPI of 1.0 or less if the pipeline
can retire an instruction every clock - if the pipeline is also
superscalar such that multiple instruction pipelines may execute, then
this type of microparallelism can theoretically yield a CPI less than
1.0.
 
# CPU

Central Processing Unit, a processor core providing arithmetic and
logic operations, possibly floating point arithmetic, and basic
register and memory operations.
 
# CPU Bound

When an application program is unable to execute any faster due to the
clock rate of the CPU and the CPI.
 
# CPU Pipeline

The use of micro-parallelism in the CPU core to provide a stage of
instruction processing every clock such that once the parallel
pipeline is started, an instruction is completed every clock
- stages typically include: fetch, decode, execution, and write-back
as a minimum. The key to pipelining is that it is possible for the
pipeline to fetch, decode, execute, and write-back all at the same
time for 4 instructions at various stages - each instruction will
actually take multiple cycles to complete, but in the aggregate one
instruction is completed every clock. (Note that pipelines may also be
superscalar such that whole pipelines may be run in parallel as well).
 
# Critical Instant

This assumption made by Liu and Layland when they formalized fixed
priority RM describes a worst-case scenario where all services in a
system would be released simultaneously.
 
# Critical Section

When two independent threads of execution share a resource, such as a
shared memory location, the section of code which accesses and
possibly updates this shared resource in each thread is called a
critical section - to ensure correctness, both threads will employ a
synchronization mechanism such as a mutex semaphore to protect the
critical section.

# Critical Time Zone

A time interval in RM theory which extends from the last release of an
interfering service to the end of the larger period containing it.
 
# Cross Compiler

A compiler which can generate code for a target processor which may be
different than the host system that it runs on.
 
# Cross Debugger

A debugger which can single step through code executing on a target
processor different than the host system the debugger interface is
running on - most often this works with a host debugger which
communicates with and controls a target agent debugger.
 
# CSMA/CD

Carrier Sense Multi-Access / Collision Detection, a protocol used in
ethernet to detect when a node is already transmitting on the shared
link and to back off and attempt to use the network later.

# Cycle-Based Profiling

Profiling code executing on a processor by periodically saving off the
current PC in a trace buffer - most often implemented by an interrupt
generating counter that counts cycles and can be programmed to raise
an interrupt every N cycles - the ISR associated can then service the
interrupt and save off the PC each time into a trace buffer.

# Cyclic Executive

A control structure to explicitly interleave execution of more than
one periodic process on a single CPU. The Cyclic Executive is often
implemented as a main loop with an invariant loop body known as the
cyclic schedule. The basic concept may be extended to include
asynchronous interrupt service routines to select one of several loop
invariants based upon even data, often called Main+ISR. In Main+ISR
several loop invariant bodies selected by input data can provide
different modes or rates of function execution - e.g. a high, medium,
and low frequency executive.
 
# D (in RMA)

The service deadline relative to request for service.
 
# DAC

Digital to Analog Conversion, most often used to provide analog output
to an actuator from a digital I/O interface - e.g. a motor or speaker.
 
# Data Flow Diagram

Data Flow Diagram, a diagram used in Structured Analysis/Design which
indicates where data in the system originates, where terminate and how
it is processed in between. (Note that a DFD typically includes a CFD
and therefore shows both data flow and control flow).

# Data Plane 

The bus or network transport and memory buffer path for data flow,
most often DMA transfer blocks, in an architecture which strictly
separates data and control. Payload data passes through the system
untouched or minimally modified according to commands and context for
the flow maintained in the separated control plane.
 
# Data Segment

A memory region reserved for global variables and constants in a C
program thread - most often each thread has its own data
segment. (Note, most programs include a Stack, Data, and Text segment
as a minimum).
 
# Datagram Transport

Transmission of packets on a link such that errors in transmission can
be detected, but are not automatically corrected nor is there
automatic retransmission of lost data - furthermore, there is no
concept of a connection (real or virtual) such that multiple messages
are unrelated and if fragmented will not be reordered or reassembled
automatically.
 
# DDR

Double Data Rate, a bus data encoding technique where read or write
data is transferred on both edges of a reference clock rather than
just one (rising edge and falling edge) - this doubles the data rate.
 
# Dead Reckoning

A technique used in robotics and vehicle navigation whereby a
direction or motion or rotation is selected and executed at a constant
rate for a calculated period of time in order to produce a desired
amount of translation or rotation to reach a target - e.g. a vehicle
might be pointed north and drive at 5 feet per second for 1 hour in
order to get to a target city due north of a starting point south of
this target. The major disadvantage of dead reckoning is that there is
no mid-course correction possible and overshoot and undershoot are
also likely.
 
# Deadline

A time relative to a request for service when the service must be
completed to realize full utility of the service.

# Deadline Driven Scheduling

Dynamic preemptive priority assignment scheduling using policies such
as Earliest Deadline First or Least-Laxity First. As presented by Liu
and Layland, this is EDF scheduling, however since its introduction, a
number of different policies have been proposed in addition to EDF.
 
# Deadline Montonic

A real-time theory directly related to RM, but with a policy such that
shortest deadline receives highest priority (rather than shortest
period) and a feasibility test based on deadlines rather than periods.
 
# Deadlock

A multi-thread condition where 2 or more threads of execution are
waiting on resources held by another and the graph of wait-for
associations is circular - e.g. if A is waiting on resource R1 to
produce resource R2; and B is waiting on resource R2 to produce
resource R1 - this is a deadlock.
 
# Decoder

A digital device which takes a bit-encoded input and produces an
analog actuator output - e.g. audio playback decoder which drives a
speaker - hardware or software that translates an encoded signal back
to its original form.
 
# Delayed Task

The state of a VxWorks task which has been programmed arbitrarily to
yield the CPU for a period of time before replacing itself back on the
ready queue - e.g. taskDelay is called and task enters DELAYED state.

# Deterministic

Causal events that are fixed in form, position, and character apriori;
in real-time systems this describes services that provide invariant
responses with no irregularity in timing of response, execution or
behavior.
 
# DFD

Data Flow Diagram, a diagram used in Structured Analysis/Design which
indicates where data in the system originates, how it is processed,
and where it terminates (from data source to data sink).
 
# Digital Control

Feedback control where the control law is driven by discrete periodic
sensor samples and based upon a Z-transform (rather than a Laplace
transform in analog control).
 
# Direct-Mapped Cache

A cache memory which is has cache lines directly mapped to main memory
locations such that a given main memory address can be loaded into one
and only one cache line, yet a set/range of main memory locations may
be loaded into that particular line.
 
# Dispatch

When an RTOS scheduler selects a thread ready to run, restores state
associated with the thread, and transfers execution control back to
the thread’s last PC if it was preempted earlier (or to its entry
point if the thread is ready to run for the first time).
 
# DMA

Direct Memory Access, a hardware state machine independent of the CPU
core which is able to transfer data in or out of memory without
directly executing core instructions, thus allowing the core to
continue execution while regions of memory are copied, updated by an
I/O device, or read out to an I/O device.
 
# DOF

Degree of Freedom, a rotational or translational dimension which a
mechanical device can move in - e.g. a typical robotic arm has 5
rotating joints: base, shoulder, elbow, wrist, and gripper - the robot
is therefore said to have 5 degrees of freedom.
 
# Double-Buffering

A technique often used in continuous media applications to allow for
data acquisition into one buffer while another is being read-out and
processed - when the acquisition buffer is full, the buffer pointers
are swapped such that the newly acquired data is processed and the
already processed buffer can now be used for acquisition.
 
# Driver

A driver is software composed of code which interfaces to a hardware
device and provides buffering, control, and status and which also
interfaces to RTOS threads/applications and provides controlled access
to the hardware device for I/O.
 
# DSP

Digital Signal Processing, a specialized embedded processor core which
includes parallel mixed analog and digital processing for typical
signal processing functions - e.g. for a Fourier transform.
 
# Dude

Etymology: origin unknown 1 : a man extremely fastidious in dress and
manner : DANDY 2 : a city dweller unfamiliar with life on the range;
especially : an Easterner in the West – webster.com
 
# Dynamic Linking

A technique where PIC software compiled into an object file format
such as ELF can be loaded and linked into existing software on an RTOS
platform on the fly after the RTOS has already been booted and is up
and running.
 
# Dynamic Priority

When thread or interrupt processing priorities are changed during run
time by code, they are said to be dynamic.
 
# Earliest Deadline First

A dynamic priority scheme for scheduling where services are assigned
priority dynamically every time the ready queue is updated, with
highest priority given to the service with the earliest impending
deadline - the scheme requires not only dynamic priority, but
preemption to work.
 
# ECC

Error Correction Circuitry, a digital circuit which automatically
corrects an SBE using an error detection and correction encoding such
as the Hamming code - normally the data read out of memory is
corrected before the final value is placed in the read buffer, but not
necessarily also corrected in main memory - a write-back may be
required to correct the actual memory location.
 
# EDAC

Error Detection and Correction, an information encoding scheme which
not only allows for detection of errors, but correction of those
errors - e.g. the Hamming code.
 
# EEPROM

Electrically Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory, a non- volatile
memory device which can be erased and re-written in circuit if so
desired.
 
# EFSM

Extended Finite State Machine, a formal method based upon state
machines which extends the basic state transition on I/O to include
side effects on transitions such as global data update and data
processing.
 
# ELF

Executable and Linking Format, an object file format which includes
significant annotation and is PIC such that these files can be
dynamically loaded and linked and such that they can serve for
supporting debug and trace analysis to map addresses back to source
code.
 
# Embedded System

A digital and analog computer system which provides a specific set of
services, driven by sensor inputs, and producing sensor outputs to
provide services - e.g. digital control in an anit-lock braking system
or call switching and billing management for a telecommunications main
trunk (Note that the scale of the services provided and of the
hardware itself does not matter).
 
# Encoder

A circuit which takes analog signal inputs and using and ADC converts
them to digital and bit encodes them - e.g. an audio recorder which
takes analog microphone input and encodes the input signal into 255
different tones - a sensor or transducer for converting rotary motion
or position to a series of electronic pulses.
 
# Entry Point

An address in a text segment which is the first instruction in a
function and serves as the starting point for a thread such that a
scheduler can simply set the PC to this address in order to start
execution of this thread.
 
# EPROM

Erasable Programmable Read Only Memory, a non-volatile memory device
which typically can be erased by a UV light source and electrically
re-programmed, but not in circuit, rather by pulling the device from a
socket, exposing it to UV and then placing it in an external
programmer.  Event-Based Profiling - a profiling technique where the
PC is saved into a trace buffer whenever events of a specific type
exceed a threshold - e.g. when data cache misses exceed N misses, the
PC is saved into a trace buffer.
 
# Exception (NMI)

An exception is normally a non-maskable interrupt because it signifies
a serious error condition which must be handled before any program
should continue execution - e.g. a bus error.
 
# Execution Jitter

When a service is dispatched and the number of cycles and/or
instructions required to complete the service varies on each release,
this service is said to have execution jitter.
 
# Extended Finite State Machine

An FSM (Finite State Machine) with more features than just states and
I/O transitions so that the Von Neumann architecture and general
programs may be modeled formally - e.g. on a state transition a
procedural function may be called and or global memory updated.
 
# External Fragmentation

When blocks of a resource such as memory are allowed to be arbitrarily
sized, small sections of the resource between used sections may evolve
from successive allocations and frees such that significant resource
exists, but is unusable unless allocations are moved to provide larger
contiguous free spaces from small many non-contiguous
spaces. (fragmentation outside of blocks).
 
# FCFS

First Come, First Served, the policy often used by an RTOS when
services/threads are at the same priority level - i.e. the first
service ready is the first one dispatched.
 
# Feasibility Test

An algorithmic or formulaic operation that takes a set of services and
their RM characteristics and will provide a binary output indicating
whether this service set can be scheduled given resources available
and resources required by the service set.
 
# FEC

Forward Error Correction, an EDAC method provided in-line such that
bit errors are handled at the link layer - e.g.  Reed Solomon encoding
(in contrast to EDAC memory).
 
# Feedback

A signal used in control systems which provides sensor inputs to
compute the difference between desired and actual plant state such
that a control law can drive the plant to a desired target control
point.
 
# FIFO

First In, First Out, a policy for queues (e.g. a dispatch queue) where
the first element queued is always the first element de-queued.
 
# Firmware

The first code to execute on a processor and therefore must initially
execute out of an NV-RAM device,although it may load itself into
memory and continue execution to complete a boot process before an
RTOS is initialized and run. Less specifically, firmware is usually
thought of as any software that directly interfaces to hardware to
make the hardware usable by higher levels of software. A firmware
engineer is typically a software engineer that has a good
understanding of hardware or vice versa – the original background of a
firmware engineer may be hardware or software design and the idea of
straddling both worlds; integrating and co- designing SW/HW is
appealing to this iconoclast.
 
# Fixed Priority Scheduling

A scheduling policy whereby threads on the ready queue are dispatched
in priority order and the priority of any given thread is not modified
over time.
 
# Flash Memory

A non-volatile memory technology that can be erased and re-programmed
in circuit like EEPROM, but has much higher density for a given cost.
 
# Floor

The floor is a mathematical operation that can be performed on a real
number (floating point) - the floor(n) is the closest integer whole
number less than or equal to n - e.g. floor(1.1) = 1. (note that
floor(1.0) = ceiling(1.0) assuming that the significance is 1, which
is the the typical definition of floor and ceiling unless otherwise
noted).
 
# Flow Control

Signals between a data transmitter and receiver used to indicate
buffer capabilities on each side so that a transmitter does not
overdrive a receiver resulting in data loss when the receiver is
unable to buffer incoming data.
 
# Form Factor

The physical dimensions of an electronic device that may be
independent of the electrical characteristics - e.g. the PCI bus
electrical specification and protocol is implemented as compact PCI,
stackable PC/104+, and PMC (PCI Mezzanine).
 
# FPGA

Field Programmable Gate Array, an array of generic transistors which
can be programmed once or on power-up to provide combinational logic
and state machines for digital processing.
 
# Fixed Priority Scheduling

A scheduling policy whereby threads on the ready queue are dispatched
in priority order and the priority of any given thread is not modified
over time (except by the application itself).
 
# Fully Associative Cache

A cache which allows main memory addresses to be loaded to any cache
line - this is the idealcache since replacement is not constrained at
all, but associative memory is complex and expensive - by comparison a
direct mapped cache is completely constrained and a set associative is
a compromise.
 
# Gather Read List

A list of not necessarily contiguous addresses in memory that are to
be read into a contiguous buffer - e.g. a host memory may have
multiple blocks in memory scattered through memory space that are to
be read by an I/O device which will gather all these blocks into a
single contiguous buffer before an I/O operation.
 
# Geek

A carnival performer whose act usually includes biting the head off a
live chicken or snake; or more recently, a person often of an
intellectual bent who is disapproved of by others.
 
# GPIO - General Purpose I/O

Digital inputs and outputs at TTL logic levels which can be used as a
generic interface to digital devices such as LEDs.
 
# Hacker

A person who is inexperienced or unskilled at a particular activity:
an expert at programming and solving problems with a computer : a
person who illegally gains access to and sometimes tampers with
information in a computer system – webster.com
 
# Hamming Code

A bit encoding used to detect and correct SBEs (single bit errors) and
to detect MBEs (multi-bit errors) for memory devices which may be
subject to SEUs.
 
# Hard Real-Time

A service or set of services which are required to meet their
deadlines relative to request frequency - if such deadlines are
missed, there is not only no utility in continuing the service, but in
fact the consequences to the system are considered fatal or critical.
 
# Harmonic

When the relative periods of services are all common multiples of each
other - this characteristic can yield cases where the CPU resource can
be deterministically scheduled to full utility. For example, T1=2,
T2=5, T3=10 has a base frequency of 1/10 th Hz and has the harmonic
sequence of 1x, 2x, 5x for the base frequency.
 
# Harvard Architecture

A core CPU architecture which splits the memory hierarchy into
separate instruction and data streams - typically including an L1
instruction cache which is independent of an L1 data cache.
 
# Heap

A memory space used for dynamic buffer management and/or dynamic
allocation of memory as requested by an application - heap space is
memory outside the data, text, and stack segments and is most often
reserved by the boot or RTOS during initialization.
 
# High Availability

A system which guarantees that it will be ready to provide services
with a quantifiable reliability - e.g. a system is said to provide 5
9’s availability if it is ready to provide service upon request
99.999% of a given year (I.e. is only unavailable for a total of about
5 minutes per year). Note that HA systems can crash, but they can’t be
out of service very long if they do.
 
# High Reliability

A system which has been designed to have a very low probability of
failure to provide services - typically measures such as redundancy,
cross strapping, and fail safe modes are designed in to ensure that
critical services have an extremely low likelihood of failure.
 
# Host

Desktop development computing system used in IDE for cross
compilation, cross debugging, connection to the target agent, trace
tools and any number of other tools that connect to a target server on
the host to communicate with target agent software resident on the
embedded system.
 
# H-Reset

Hardware Reset, either from a power-on reset state transition or from
assertion of an external signal to drive a hardware reset.
 
# HSTL

High Speed Transceiver Logic, a 0.0-1.5v logic level standard used for
high speed single-ended digital I/O, most often for memory I/O (speeds
of 180 MhZ and greater).
 
# HWIC

Hardware In Circuit, a concept whereby debug and trace tools have
hardware probes in circuit with a CPU by interfacing to signals coming
from the CPU/SoC ASIC to the rest of the system board for the purpose
of snoop tracing and/or control - e.g. JTAG debug emulator, Vision ICE
Event Trace, RISCWatch trace port probe, and CodeTEST Universal trace
probe.
 
# ICE

In Circuit Emulator, a debug and trace device which monitors all I/O
pins on a CPU/SoC ASIC and provides memory trace, external interrupt
trace, JTAG, I/O pin trace, and emulates the state of the system
including all registers, cache, and addressing to aid in firmware
development and board verification.
 
# IDE

Integrated Development Environment, a software development system
which for an embedded system includes a cross and native compiler,
cross and native debugger, and many target tools interfaced through a
host-based target server and a target-based target agent.
 
# Importance

In real-time systems theory services with low priority based upon RM
policy may still be critical to system operation - they are important
despite being low priority.
 
# Interference

When a higher priority thread preempts a lower one in a fixed priority
preemptive system the time that the CPU is unavailable to lower
priority threads is referred to as interference time.
 
# Internal Fragmentation

When a resource such as memory is made available in minimum sized
blocks, this can help reduce external fragmentation, but when a user
of the resource requires less than a full block, this causes internal
fragmentation.

# Interrupt 

A hardware signal assertion into the CPU core from an IO device to
indicate that an event has occurred such as data available on an input
interface (e.g. a sensor sample or DMA transfer has been completed).
 
# Interrupt Handler

During the normal CPU pipeline processing (fetch, decode, execute,
write-back) an external device may assert an signal input or an
internal sub-block may also assert a signal input to the CPU core
which causes it to asynchronously branch to an interrupt vector (a
memory location) where basic code called the handler acknowledges and
services the hardware and then calls application ISRs.
 
# Interrupt Latency

The delay between assertion of an interrupt signal by a device and the
time at which the PC is vectored to an interrupt handler is known as
the interrupt latency.
 
# Interrupt Vector

An address in memory where the CPU sets the PC after an interrupt
signal is asserted, causing the CPU to asynchronously branch to this
location and to execute the instruction there - normally a CPU will
have a number of interrupt inputs (e.g. x86 IRQ0-15) and each signal
asserted causes the CPU to vector to a different address such that
different handlers can be associated with each interrupt signal.
 
# Interval Timer

A double-buffered state machine in a CPU core which allows software to
set a value in a register that is loaded into a separate count-down
register which asserts an interrupt at zero (or perhaps all F’s if it
counts up) and automatically is reloaded with the interval register
value to repeat the process over and over - this hardware can therefor
be used for basic timer services in an RTOS.
 
# IO Bound

A condition where an application does not have sufficient I/O
bandwidth to meet throughput goals or real-time deadlines.
 
# ISA Legacy Interrupt

Industry Standard Architecture Legacy Interrupt, specifically refers
to x86 architecture IRQ0-15 which have been part of the x86
architecture from the beginning (8086) and support a number of well-
known PC devices and services such as booting from a hard drive.
 
# Isochronal

Uniform in time, having equal duration, recurring at regular
intervals; literally the same in time, which in real-time systems
means that a service is required to produce a response at a precise
time relative to a service request - not too early and not too
late. This is important to continuous media applications and digital
control which are sensitive to jitter. Most often isochronal services
hold a response computed ahead of deadline that is delivered to an
interface within a narrow band around the optimal time. For data
transport, isochronal channels provide guaranteed bandwidth and
latency characteristics so that the transmission of continuous media
is provided with a constant bit, byte, or frame rate per unit time.
 
# ISR

Interrupt Service Routine, the application level of an interrupt
handler which is often a call-back function registered with an RTOS
that installs the interrupt handler at an interrupt vector.
 
# Jiffy

A term to describe the tick of a hardware interval timer – often the
smallest unit of time that the OS can track - e.g. on x86 architecture
the standard interval timer ticks about every 0.45 microseconds, but
the Linux OS typically loads an interval timer count to generate
interrupts such that it can control processes on a 10 millisecond
software tick.
 
# Jitter

When latency and/or timing of an operation or process changes with
each iteration, this is jitter - i.e. when latency/timing is not
constant. Jitter as a term can be used to describe many different
types of operations or processes - e.g. execution jitter, period
jitter, response jitter.
 
# JTAG

Joint Test Applications Group, an IEEE committee that standardized the
concept of boundary scan and the TAP (Test Access Port), which is used
to verify integration of ASICS in a system (boundary scan), but is now
also typically used in firmware development to control and single step
a CPU by loading data and commands through the TAP with JTAG. JTAG
includes the following signals: TDI (Test Data In), TDO (Test Data
Out), TRST (Test Reset), Clock, Test Mode Set.
 
# Keep-alive

An indication from a thread/process/task on a system that it is
functioning normally or perhaps similar indication from a subsystem in
a larger system - the keep- alive is most often a simple ID and count
indicating that the subsystem/thread/process/task is advancing through
its service loop - often referred to as a heartbeat as well.
 
# Kernel

The software in an RTOS which directly controls all critical resources
such as CPU, memory, and device I/O - the kernel is typically
interfaced to by applications through an API or device driver.
 
# Kernel Image

The binary machine code text segment, data segment, stack, and BSS
used for the RTOS kernel software.
 
# Kernel Instrumentation

Tools like Windview or LTT which provide active tracing of C code
and/or RTOS events require that code, often specifically kernel code,
be instrumented with trace instructions that provide efficient update
of a trace buffer with a trace token to track progress of the code and
to mark events for later timeline analysis.
 
# L1 Cache

Level 1 Cache, a high-speed memory integrated on-chip with a
 
# CPU core

On the same ASIC for data access that can most often be completed in a
single clock.
 
# L2 Cache

Level 2 Cache, a high speed memory off-chip which can be accessed in
several clocks.
 
# Latch-Up

A non recoverable bit error due to permanent transistor logic damage
to a memory device or register.
 
# Latency

Delay in an operation or process due to physical limitations such as
electronic propagation delay, the speed of light, the number of clock
cycles required to execute instructions, or time to modify a physical
memory device.
 
# Laxity - Laxity = (Time-to-Deadline

Time-to-Completion), but the time to the completion of a service can
be difficult to determine, so most often an estimate of the
Time-to-Completion is used which is derived from (WCET -
Computation-Time-So-Far).
 
# Layered Driver

A layered driver includes a Top Half and Bottom Half
- the Top Half provides an interface to application code wishing to
use a hardware resource and the Bottom Half provides an interface to a
hardware device.
 
# LCM

Least Common Multiple, the LCM is the smallest number which is also
multiple of 2 different numbers - e.g. given x=3, y=5, the
LCM(x,y)=15.  This concept is key to periodic service analysis in
real-time theory because it is necessary to diagram service times over
the LCM of all periods in order to fully analyze timing demands upon a
resource. Note that the LCM for numbers that are prime can be very
large compared to harmonic numbers.
 
# Least Laxity First (LLF)

A dynamic priority policy where services on the ready queue are
assigned higher priority if their laxity is the least (where laxity is
the time difference between their deadline and remaining computation
time) - this requires the scheduler to know all outstanding service
request times, their deadlines, the current time, remaining
computation time for all services, and to re-assign priorities to all
services on every preemption. Estimating remaining computation time
for each service can be difficult and typically requires a worst-case
approximation.
 
# LED

Light Emitting Diode, a device typically used to provide visual I/O
and status for an embedded system.  Lehoczky, Sha, and Ding

# Theorem (a.k.a Theorem 2)

If a set of services can be scheduled over the period of the longest
period service after a critical instant, then the system is feasible
(i.e. is guaranteed not to miss a deadline in the future).
 
# Limit Sensor

A sensor which detects when hardware has reached a physical limit -
e.g. when a robotic arm has driven a joint through full rotation after
which continued motor drive will break the joint.
 
# Linking (Dynamic or Static)

Linking is the process by which an executable image is assigned
addresses for all function entry points, all global variables, and all
constants which may be referenced by other software modules - these
addresses can be statically assigned once and for all at a pre-
determined offset in physical memory (static linking) or may be
position independent such that only relative addresses are assigned
until the module is loaded, at which time physical addresses are
derived from the relative (dynamic linking).  

# Live-lock

Related to deadlock, this situation arises when a circular wait for
resources evolves and an attempt to break the deadlock is made by
having each requester drop their requests and then re-request them -
if the requests are well synchronized, then the system may cycle
between deadlock and dropping requests over and over.
 
# Logic Analyzer

A hardware, firmware, software analysis tool that provides generic
acquisition of digitally clocked signals (or arbitrary digital signals
which are clocked by the analyzer internally).
 
# LSP

Linux Support Package, an embedded Linux term, much like a BSP, which
refers to code required to boot
 
# Linux on a given architecture and platform

E.g. the PowerPC 750 LSP.

# LTT – Linux Trace Toolkit

A tool that traces events in the Linux kernel, encodes them, and
stores a trace of event codes in memory. The event trace can be loaded
later into a tool for timing analysis.
 
# LVDS

Low Voltage Differential Serial, an electrical standard for
transmission of high-rate serial signals on wire pairs that carry
differential signals to encode data.
 
# Main+ISR

This is essentially the same software architecture as a Cyclic
Executive, however, Main+ISR may be much simpler in that it normally
has just one main loop and a small number of ISRs compared to a Cyclic
Executive which may have multiple loops operating at different
frequencies.
 
# MBE

Multi-bit Error, a condition when more than one bit in a word is in
error - typically this can not be corrected.
 
# Memory Hierarchy

The whole memory system design from the fastest and typically smallest
devices to the slowest and typically largest devices - e.g. L1/L2
cache, main memory, and flash.
 
# Memory Mapped I/O

I/O devices which can be read or written can be mapped into the
address space of a processor allowing software to simply update an
address in order to write to the device or read an address to read
from the device - the device must respond to the addressing by the
CPU, I.e.  decode it and then read/write data on a bus which both the
device and CPU interface with.
 
# Memory Protection

An MMU feature which allows address ranges on page boundaries (a
minimum size memory block) to be specified as read-only - if an update
to such a range is attempted, the MMU will assert an NMI exception.
 
# Message Queue

An RTOS software mechanism which abstracts shared memory data into
atomic enqueue and dequeue operations on a buffer controlled by the
RTOS and known only to applications by an ID, accessible to them only
through RTOS message queue operations. Operations are atomic with
respect to threads only (not interrupts), and so most often only a
message queue send is allowed in interrupt context - never a message
queue receive.
 
# Message Sequence Chart

A diagramming method used in the Specification and Design Language
(SDL) as well as UML (Universal Modeling Language) which shows threads
of execution and all messages (or function call interfaces) which
associate the threads in a protocol.
 
# Micro-code

Machine code which executes on a state machine internal to a processor
or on a simple state machine device that is independent of the main
execution pipeline - e.g. the Bt878 RISC processor executes code
fetched from the x86 processor’s memory over the PCI bus
- this code is micro-code from the viewpoint of the x86 system.
 
# Micro-parallelism

Parallel processing inside the CPU core.
 
# MMU

Memory Management Unit, a block in most CPU cores which provides
virtual to physical address mapping, address range checking, and can
protect read-only address ranges from unintentional update.
 
# Module Loading

When an ELF module is transferred to an embedded target and
dynamically linked into the kernel and other application code on the
fly.
 
# MTD

Mapping to Device, a term used to describe Bottom Half code used in a
flash file system driver.  Multi-access Network - a network such as
ethernet where more than one device can use the physical and link
layer of the network, thus requiring a CSMA/CD protocol for shared
use.  Multi-tasking - when a CPU is shared and multiplexed by a
scheduler in order that multiple threads with state information may
execute on a single CPU or may be mapped onto a set of CPUs
dynamically. Tasks include state information that goes beyond the
minimal requirements of register state, stack, and PC for a thread -
e.g. task variables, a task error indicator, name, and many other
elements of a VxWorks TCB.  Multi-threaded - when a CPU is shared and
multiplexed by a scheduler with the minimal management of execution
state for each thread of execution (register state, stack, and PC).
 
# Mutex Semaphore

A specialized semaphore (compared to a binary semaphore) which is
specifically used to protect critical sections of code for
multi-thread safety - this semaphore is used to guarantee mutually
exclusive access to a shared resource such that only one thread may
access a common resource at a time - with shared memory this prevents
data corruption that could be caused by multiple readers/writers -
e.g. if a writer has partially updated a shared data structure, is
preempted/interrupted, and then a reader accessed the partially
updated data, the data may be completely inconsistent.
 
# Nand Flash

A flash memory device which is normally erased to all F’s and writes
are bit-wise masked in with an and operation.
 
# NCD SCAM Chip

A pre-burned Microchip PIC which includes code to generate PWM signals
for hobby servos (2 channels) based upon an RS-232 command.
 
# Necessary and Sufficient

A feasibility test in real-time theory which will pass all service
sets that can be scheduled and will never fail a set that can be
scheduled (more precise than a sufficient test which may falsely
reject some service sets, but will never falsely ok a service set than
can not be safely scheduled).

# Nerd

May be based on a creature portrayed in If I Ran the Zoo by Dr.
Seuss: an unstylish, unattractive, or socially inept person; one
slavishly devoted to intellectualism or academics to the point of
their own detriment.
 
# Nesting 

When a construct is used inside the same sort of construct one inside
the other - e.g. if a critical section encloses another critical
section the critical sections are said to be nested.
 
# Non-Blocking

When a request for a resource can not be met immediately, the RTOS can
either block the calling thread until it is available or return it an
error code indicating why the request can not be met and letting the
thread go on - the latter is non-blocking.

# Non-Preemptive

When all threads run to completion without interruption by other
requests for service or the scheduler during execution.  Nor Flash a
flash memory device which is normally erased to all 0’s and writes are
bit-wise masked in with an or operation.
 
# NTSC

National Television Systems Council, the standard for analog color
television transmission with 640x480 pixels.
 
# NVRAM

Non-Volatile Random Access Memory, memory which persistently holds
data whether or not a system is powered or not - e.g. a battery
backed-up DRAM, a Flash memory device, EEPROM, or EPROM.
 
# Object Code

Machine code annotated with symbol information (variable and function
names and addresses) and information to support debugging (source file
names and locations).
 
# OCD

On-Chip Debugging, a type of JTAG front end that allows a typical line
debugger to single step code through the JTAG protocol.
 
# OnCE

On-Chip Emulation, a type of JTAG front end that allows for not only
debug through JTAG, but additional control such as register viewing
and setting.
 
# Offloading

The concept of taking a software service and re- allocating it to a
hardware implementation on a parallel processing unit in order to free
the main CPU of loading - e.g.  a network interface card may perform
functions basic to

TCP/IP such as checksums in order to offload those operations from the
host CPU.
 
# On-line Admission

When a system can run a feasibility test while currently providing
other services in order to determine whether new services can safely
be added to the current safe set.
 
# On-Off Control

The use of relays to turn on and off motors to control a mechanical
device.
 
# Optical Navigation

Using computer vision images of a scene to determine ranges to targets
and to plan paths to navigate to a target using only video data.
 
# Optimal Policy

A fixed priority assignment policy which will successfully schedule
any set of services which can be scheduled by any other fixed priority
policy.  Over-run Policy - how a system handles a service which
attempts to continue execution beyond its advertised deadline -
e.g. the scheduler could terminate the service.
 
# Packet Switched

A network protocol which allows links to be shared by multiple
datagram or virtual circuit protocols and routes packets between
end-points based upon their header information.
 
# PC (program counter)

The Program Counter is normally a register used by a CPU to track the
current or next address of main memory which contains a machine
instruction to execute. (Note that a trace of the PC over time
provides the definition of the thread of execution until a context
switch occurs, if it does at all).
 
# PCI

Peripheral Component Interconnect, a standard defined by the PCI
Special Interest Group to provide CPU, memory, and IO device
interconnection for data transport.
 
# PCI Bus Probing

A process that allows a BIOS or OS software to find all PCI devices
and functions on a given PCI bus using configuration space registers.
 
# PCI Configuration Space

A well known port address on x86 architecture where a PCI bus master
can read/write registers in order to find other PCI devices and their
functions and configure them as far as memory mapping and interrupts
as a minimum.
 
# PCI Interrupt Routing

Pci interrupts A-D can be routed onto x86 legacy interrupts IRQ0-15 in
order to allow PCI devices to interrupt an x86 core.
 
# PCI-Express

Previously known as 3GIO, this standard is a scalable differential
serial bus architecture for 2.5 Gbps main-board interconnection and
peripheral connection.
 
# Peak-Up

A computer vision algorithm which finds a bright spot or the center of
an object by segmenting an image and finding the centroid of a target
within the image.
 
# Pending Task

A VxWorks task state which indicates the task is blocking on a
resource not presently available.
 
# Period Jitter

When the period of a service request is not constant.
 
# Period Transform

A real-time theory adjustment to service characteristics to simplify
analysis or to elevate importance of a service whereby the service
period is assumed to be shorter than it really is.
 
# Pessimistic Assumption

Rm is full of assumptions that are worst case and therefore make it a
very safe form of analysis, but also may lead to excessive resource
margin in order to guarantee deadlines - e.g. WCET.

# PID Controller 

Proportional-Integral-Derivative Controller, a controller that sets
outputs proportional to error, integrates sensor inputs to find for
example velocity from acceleration, and also uses derivatives such as
velocity from position measurements in order to control a system and
obtain a target operational state - e.g. a cruise control provides
acceleration proportional to the difference between current and target
speed and integrates to determine when the target will be achieved and
when to decelerate.
 
# Pipeline Hazard

A condition in a CPU pipeline that forces it to stall - e.g. a cache
miss.
 
# Pipeline Stall

When a CPU pipeline must stop until a resource is made available.

# PIT 

See Programmable Interval Timer.
 
# Pixel - A picture element

An array of picture elements forms an NxM image where each pixel
encodes the XY position, brightness and RGB color mix for the picture
element in the image.

# Point-to-Point 

A network topology which connects nodes one-to-one.
 
# Polling

When status is checked periodically (synchronously) by a looping
construct.
 
# Polling Interrupt Service Routine

An ISR which must determine the source of an interrupt by reading
status registers when a hardware interrupt is shared by multiple
devices (note that most polling ISRs also provide ISR chaining).
 
# Position Independent Code

Code which is base address independent such that it can be mapped in
at any base address and all other entry points, jumps, and memory
locations are set relative to the dynamically determined base address.
 
# POSIX

Portable Operating Systems Interface, a standard for operating system
mechanisms and APIs. POSIX includes a number of sub-standards such as
1003.1b which covers basic real-time mechanisms.
# Power-on Reset 

A CPU state after initial power-on, which most often causes the CPU to
branch to a known address and perform basic operations like resetting
the memory controller, bus, and other basic interfaces.
 
# Preemption

When the current thread executing on a CPU is placed back on the ready
queue by the scheduler and state information saved so that a different
thread can be allocated the CPU.

# Predictable Response 

Compared to deterministic response, predictable means that the
response behavior is bounded and characterized by a statistical
distribution of response times rather than having an invariant
response time.
 
# Priority

An encoding which controls the order of dispatch for threads by a
scheduler when more than one is ready to use the CPU resource.
 
# Priority Ceiling

A priority is defined that is the highest priority a thread can have
that may lock a resource, this priority level is stored as the
resource’s priority ceiling - a thread which has locked the resource
is given priority as high as the highest priority thread blocking on
the resource up to the ceiling value - i.e. the thread holding the
resource always has a priority higher than or equal to all threads
waiting to obtain the resource, but amplification is limited to the
ceiling value. When the priority amplification is limited to the
highest priority of threads involved in the mutex access to a shared
resource it is a “least locker” protocol – when the amplification is
simply set to the highest priority in the system, it is a “ceiling”
protocol.
 
# Priority Inheritence - See Briand and Roy p. 66

If a thread is holding a resource and another thread of higher
priority is blocking on the same resrouce, the thread holding the
resource inherits the blocked threads priority for the duration of the
critical section. There is no limit on the priority level that may be
inherited.
 
# Priority Inversion (Unbounded)

Whenever a thread is unable to obtain the CPU and a thread of lower
priority is holding it, this is called priority inversion. The
condition is most often caused by a secondary resource needed by a
thread such as a shared memory critical section - in a simple two
thread case, if a lower priority thread is in a critical section, then
a higher priority thread experiences priority inversion for the
duration of the critical section, however, if the low priority thread
suffers interference from a medium priority thread, the high priority
thread could potentially be blocked for an indeterminate amount of
time, an unbounded priority inversion.

# Priority Preemptive Run-to-Completion 

A scheduling mechanism which dispatches any thread ready to run based
on priority as soon as the set of ready threads is updated
(preemptive) and allows a dispatched thread to run indefinitely unless
another higher priority thread is added to the ready set (via an
interrupt or a call to the RTOS by the currently running thread).  One
danger of this type of system is that a high priority non-terminating
thread will take over the CPU resource completely. Priority Queue - A
mechanism for implementing a first-in-first-out policy, but with N
levels of priority such that all items at the highest priority level
are dequeued first first-in-first-out before all items at the next
lower priority level.
 
# Process

A thread of execution with stack, register state, and PC state along
with significant additional software state such as copies of all I/O
descriptors (much more than a task TCB for example) including a
protected memory data segement (protected from writes by other
processes).
 
# Programmed IO

A technique where software reads and writes each word to and from a
device interface involving the CPU in each and every transfer.

# Programmable Interval Timer (PIT) 

A CPU core timer that can be loaded with a value to count down with a
known decrement period so that when it reaches zero an interrupt is
asserted and the counter optionally reset automatically. In some cases
it may count up to 0xFFFF_FFFF.
 
# Protocol Stack

A layered driver which includes data processing between the Bottom
Half and Top Half layers - each layer can be separated and has a
distinct interface - e.g. TCP/IP.

# Pure Function 

A function coded so that it only uses stack (no global data at al),
depends only in input parameters, and calls only other pure functions
is a pure function and is also thread safe.
 
# PWM

Pulse Width Modulation, a technique to control a motor or other
normally analog device by creating a pulse train of digital TTL output
to simulate an analog output.
 
# Quality of Service

Definition of service levels based upon guarantees of resource
availability for each service - e.g. processor capacity can be
reserved for each service in advance (say 10%) and the system
guarantees that this capacity will be available within in a worst case
period of time, however may not guarantee all services will meet their
deadlines.

# RAS 

Reliability, Availability, Serviceability
 
# Rate Monotonic

A hard real-time theory for fixed priority preemptive run-
to-completion systems where priority is assigned according to service
request period (higher priority for shorter period) and where
feasibility of a set of services can be determined by the RM least
upper bound or an iterative test such as the completion test.
 
# Reachability Space

The points in space where a robotic device can place and end
effector - e.g. places in space where a robotic arm can grapple an
object.
 
# Ready

The VxWorks task state where a task is ready to running and waiting
only on the CPU to be granted by the scheduler.


# Ready Queue

A FIFO queue of VxWorks tasks that are ready to execute on the CPU.


# Real-Time (System) 

An event driven system (sensors provide input through ADCs) for which
services provide computation to produce a response (output to
actuators interfaced with DACs) before a deadline relative to the
request for service. A hard real-time system must never miss a
deadline, but a soft or best effort system may be allowed to miss
occasional deadlines.
 
# Real-Time Clock

A hardware clock circuit which maintains an absolute date and time
(e.g. Gregorian or Julian date), often employing a battery- backed
clock circuit and/or a method to synchronize with an external time
source such as Universal Coordinated Time.
 
# Real-Time Correctness

A real-time service must produce functionally correct outputs and also
provide the outputs prior to a relative deadline to be real-time
correct.

# RTOS 

Real-Time Operating System, a scheduling and resource management
framework for implementation of software services that must provide
responses to requests prior to well defined deadlines.  Re-boot - when
a system is commanded or as a part of a recovery mode re-enters the
boot code entry point causing re-initialization of memory, I/O
interfaces, and re-start of all services.
 
# Recovery

A key feature of a high availability system, this is the mechanism by
which a system which is experiencing system failures restarts those
services. A system may need to start a recovery process for a number
of reasons - e.g. deadlock, priority inversion, livelock, resource
exhaustion. Often recovery is achieved by the hardware watch dog which
reboots the system.

# Reentrant Function

A reentrant function must be designed so that it can be called from
multiple execution contexts (threads) and still provide correct
results. A reentrant function must either allocate unique copies of
global data for each execution context (VxWorks task variables),
provide mutex protection for global data, or avoid the use of global
data completely as a pure function.
 
# Regression Test

Re-running a test to verify that features previously verified still
work after bug fixes or feature addition - intended to prevent
unintentional interactions between software modifications that might
introduce new problems.
 
# Relay

A mechanical or solid state device which provides a simple switch -
e.g. double pole double throw or single pole single throw – normally
open, latching, or normally closed when not energized.
 
# Reliable Transport

A data transport protocol on a network which includes error
detection/correction, retransmission and supports diverse routing such
that overall data is delivered if at all possible.
 
# Resource Arbiter

A sub-system which implements a resource grant policy
- e.g. a a bus arbiter coordinates bus grants for bus requests from
multiple masters and targets.
 
# Response Time

The latency between a request for service (typically by an ISR) and
the generation of a response output.
 
# Ring Buffer

A data structure which provides multiple serially reusable buffers -
most often used to buffer incoming data from a device interface before
it can be processed - likewise for output data before it can be
transmitted.
 
# RISC

Reduced Instruction Set Computer.

# RM

Rate Montonic, the basic theory formulated by Liu and Layland for
fixed priority multiplexing of a single CPU that is intended to
provide multiple services over time.
 
# RMA

Rate Monotonic Analysis,the process of analyzing the C, T, and D
characteristics of a set of services to be executed on a CPU and
determination of priorities according to RM policy and feasibility
according to a sufficient or better yet, necessary and sufficient
test.

# RM Least Upper Bound (a.k.a. Theorem One) 

This bound derived from the critical time zone for a set of services
released at a critical states that the sum of the service resource
requirements must be less than m(2 1/m -1) where m is the number of
services in the set.
 
# RM policy

Services with shorter period are assigned higher priority.
 
# ROM Based

A boot or kernel image which is PIC and initially runs out of a
non-volatile device, but tests and initializes memory and then copies
itself to working memory and continues execution there.
 
# ROM Resident

A boot or kernel image that executes out of non-volatile memory and
sets up a data and stack segment in working memory, but the text
segment remains always in the non-volatile memory.
 
# Round Robin

A best effort scheme with preemptive time-slicing where the scheduler
assigns threads a slice in a fair fashion where all ready threads are
given a slice of CPU and put back on the end of the queue if needed.
 
# Sanity Monitor (Software)

A service which periodically resets the hardware watchdog timer and
also monitors keep-alive messages from other critical services in the
system - if a critical service fails to post a keep- alive, then the
sanity monitor provides error handling and attempts to recover that
service - if the sanity monitor itself fails to function, then the
hardware watchdog timer will time out and the whole system will reboot
and start a system level recovery process.

# SBE 

Single Bit Error, when an SEU causes a bit flip or other form of
unintended bit flip occurs in a memory word.
 
# Scatter Write List

A list of not necessarily contiguous addresses in memory that are to
be written from a contiguous buffer - e.g. a host memory may have
multiple blocks in memory scattered through memory space that are
updated by an I/O device which contains all of the data to be updated
in a single contiguous buffer.


# Scheduler

A kernel service loop which monitors the Ready Queue and will preempt
and dispatch a task in place of the currently running task according
to priorities, providing a context switch. The scheduler is executed
as a result of making a kernel API call from task and interrupt
contexts and also executes in a polling mode when there are not other
tasks to execute.
 
# Scheduling Point

A necessary and sufficient test based upon the Sha, Lehoczky, and Ding
theorem which determines whether all services can be scheduled within
the longest period.
 
# SDRAM

Synchronous Dynamic Random Access Memory.
 
# Semaphore

An RTOS mechanism which can be used for synchronization of otherwise
asynchronous tasks in order to coordinate resource usage such as
shared memory, or to simply indicate a condition such as data is
available on an interface.
 
# Semaphore Take

A semaphore operation which allows a thread to check and see if a
resource is available - if not, the RTOS can either block the calling
thread until it is, or simply return an error code.
 
# Semaphore Give

A semaphore operation which allows a thread to indicate that a
resource is available - if another thread is blocking on this
resource, then this will un-block that thread.
 
# Sensor

A transducer device which indicates physical status of a system or the
environment in which it operates with an electrical signal to encode
the system/environment characteristic it is designed to measure -
e.g. a thermistor, a position encoder, limit switch, stress/strain
gauge, pressure transducer, ...
 
# Service

A specific computation provided for inputs which produces required
output in order to meet a system requirement. Real-time systems
include periodic or sporadic services that are requested on a periodic
or sporadic basis triggered by externally sensed events.
 
# Service Release

When an external event sensed by an embedded system indicates a
request for service, the thread which provides the service is
released - e.g. an ISR can do a semaphore give to indicate sensor data
is available for processing.
 
# Set Associative Cache

A cache which allows main memory addresses to be loaded in N different
cache lines - a set associative cache is said to be N ways, where each
way is a different cache line which the same address data may be
loaded - e.g. 32 way set associative cache.
 
# SEU

Single Event Upset, a phenomena where a memory bit is flipped due to
an environmental influence such as electromagnetic radiation. The
bit’s original value may be restored if the SEU can be detected and
corrected by a system monitoring technique.
 
# Shared Interrupt

When an interrupt can be asserted by multiple devices, it is shared
and requires the interrupt handler to poll status - I.e. the handler
must read the status of every device that may have asserted the
interrupt to figure out which device in fact did.
 
# Shared Memory

When more than one thread on a single CPU or on multiple CPUs can
access the same memory locations, this memory is shared, and shared
memory must be protected by a synchronization mechanism if reads and
writes are allowed.  Signal (Software) -a software signal is often
also called a software interrupt and in fact functions much like a
hardware interrupt does but at the scheduler/thread level - when a
signal is thrown by one thread to another, the throw call causes the
RTOS to potentially dispatch the catching thread’s handler instead of
the code it is currently executing after the catch kernel code is
executed - so, a signal can be used to asynchronously interrupt a
running thread.
 
# Signal Block Diagram

A systems design method used in SDL (Specification and Description
Language) where hardware and software elements can be modeled as
blocks with signal list inputs and outputs - inside the blocks at a
lower level, all signals are ultimately consumed or generated by
EFSMs.
 
# Signal Catch

When a signal is received by a thread by the RTOS scheduler on behalf
of the thread - the catch modifies the catching thread’s state such
that the PC, registers, and stack are saved and when the thread is
dispatched next, the scheduler dispatches the threads registered
signal handler rather than where it was last preempted.
 
# Signal Throw

When a thread wants to asynchronously interrupt the normal flow of
execution of another thread, it can call an RTOS mechanism to throw a
signal to the other thread instructing the RTOS to dispatch the other
thread’s signal handler rather than it’s last context.
 
# Slack Time

On a real-time system, when no real-time services are requesting CPU
time (I.e. waiting on the ready queue or actively running), this
unused CPU time is called slack time and often can be used for non
real-time best effort processing. Slack time is often created by
service releases where the actual execution time taken is much shorter
than WCET due to execution jitter.
 
# SoC

System On-a-Chip, an ASIC which includes one or more CPU cores, a bus,
and I/O interfaces such that it essentially places devices previously
on a board in earlier products on a single ASIC.
 
# Soft Real-Time

When a service can occasionally miss a deadline and over-run it or
terminate and drop a service release without system failure, these
services are considered soft - e.g. a video encoder compression and
transport service might occasionally drop a frame when compression
takes too long - as long as the video stream is not critical and an
occasional drop- out is acceptable w.r.t. system requirements, this
service can be considered a soft real-time service.
 
# Software Profiling

Periodically tracing the cycle count and the current PC or actively
tracing it by instrumenting all function entry and exit points to save
cycle count to a trace buffer allows for determination of where most
of the execution time is spent and how many cycles basic blocks of
code such as functions requires - this type of tracing provides a
profile of the software.

Profiles can be at a function level, basic code block level (bounded by
branches) or at a C statement level - overhead is higher for lower level
profiling.
 
# Software Sanity

Software is said to be sane when embedded services check in with a
sanity monitor by posting a keep-alive - the sanity monitor itself is
known to be sane (functioning correctly) if it resets the hardware
watchdog timer.

# Sporadic 

And event that occurs occasionally, singly, or in scattered instances,
infrequently, without a deterministic period, but not aperiodic.
 
# SRAM

Static Random Access Memory.
 
# S-Reset

Soft Reset, a reset state for a CPU which can be commanded by an
application program.
 
# Stack Segment

A segment of memory allocated for a thread which provides buffer space
for function arguments and local variables - each application thread,
the kernel thread, ISRs, and signal handlers typically all have their
own stack space for the purpose of parameter passing and local
variable instantiation.
 
# State Machine

A formal design notation which includes a start state, state
transitions driven by inputs made while in a specific state, and
outputs on transitions.
 
# Static Priority Stereo Vision

The use of two cameras separated by a known constant distance to judge
distances to objects of unknown physical dimensions through the use of
triangulation.
 
# Stress Testingp

Test vectors which are designed to stress the system by going beyond
the requirements-based specification for limits - e.g. commanding at
high rate, exposure to high voltage ESD, shock testing, and thermal
cycling.
 
# Superscalar

A CPU pipeline feature that employs parallel hardware within a single
CPU core to allow for 2 or more instructions to be fetched, executed
and retired concurrently. Note that this feature of a CPU pipeline can
yield a CPI less than 1.0 for the CPU core.
 
# Suspended Task

A VxWorks task state entered when an exception (NMI) is generated by a
task - the RTOS handles the exception and suspends the task to protect
the system. The suspend state can also be entered explicitly through
the taskSuspend API call in VxWorks.
 
# SWIC

Software In Circuit, a technique where software instrumentation is
used to trace execution - e.g. logging messages to a file from an
application.  Switch-Hook - a VxWorks call-back mechanism where the
kernel calls a user function on each and every context switch.
 
# Symbol Table

An array of function and global variable names and addresses where
they are stored in their text and data segments respectively.
 
# Synchronous

An event or stimulus that occurs at a specific point in time relative
to other events in the system rather than at any time - e.g. a thread
of execution can perform a semaphore take to synchronize with an ISR -
the ISR will execute asynchronously, but the processing provided by
the thread performing the semaphore take will be synchronous since it
is known that this processing will only be provided after the
semaphore take AND the semaphore give performed by the ISR.
 
# Synchronous Bus

A bus that has clocked address, data, and control cycles.
 
# Syndrome

The encoded bits in an error detection and correction scheme which
indicate SBE or MBE and contain the coded bit position that can be
used to complement an errant bit for correction of SBEs.
 
# System Lifecycle

The process of turning an embedded system concept into a working
maintained system. The steps potentially include: concept,
requirements, high-level design, detailed design, implementation of
units and subsystems, unit/subsystem test, integration, system test,
acceptance testing, fielding, maintenance, and unit/system regression
testing.
 
# System Test

End-to-end and feature tests performed after the units and subsystems
in a larger system have been unit tested and are integrated for the
first time.
 
# T (in RMA)

The period of a service request type. In many cases this will be based
upon the worst case frequency of the event(s) that cause a service to
be released.
 
# Target

The embedded computing system including the processor complex and all
I/O devices.
 
# Target Agent

An embedded service which provides development, debug, and performance
analysis features such as cross debugging, code loading and linking,
and RTOS event traces.
 
# Target Server

A service on the host development system which provides an interface
to host tools and translates user inputs into target agent commands
and target agent responses into application data.
 
# Task

A thread with normal thread state including stack, registers, PC, but
also including signal handlers, task variables, task ID and name,
priority, entry point, and a number of state and inter-task
communication data contained in a TCB.
 
# Task Spinning

When a task loops where it is expected to block and wait for a
resource before proceeding.
 
# Task Wedging

When a task blocks on a resource indefinitely or is suspended or fails
to loop and post a keep-alive periodically.
 
# TCB

Task Control Block, the data structure associated with a VxWorks task
which contains all task data in addition to task stack and context.
 
# Text Segment (Code Segment)

A segment of memory used for storing the machine code associated with
an application, kernel image, or boot image.
 
# TFTP

Trivial File Transfer Protocol, a simplified FTP (File Transfer
Protocol) which allows a client to download files from one known
directory in a file system.
 
# Thread (of execution)

A thread is simply the trace of a CPU’s PC over time not including
context switch code execution by an RTOS. State information may or may
not be associated with a thread of execution, but the value of the PC
before a context switch is the minimum state that must be maintained
on a system which includes preemption.  Thread Safe – code is thread
safe only if it functions as expected when executed simultaneously by
multiple threads. A function that is designed to be reentrant or a
pure function is thread safe.
 
# Throughput

An aggregate measure of speed and efficiency for a device - e.g. for a
processor the measure is MIPS (Millions of Instructions Per Second)
and for an I/O device the measure would be Mbps or Gbps (Mega bits/sec
or Giga bits/sec).
 
# Tick

A counter which counts interval timer interrupts and is used by an
 
# RTOS for basic timer services

E.g. to provide the minimum resolution for timeouts on blocking calls
(the RTOS will unblock a call made with a timeout specified within
tick accuracy).
 
# Timeout

When making a blocking call, in order to avoid “wedging”, where a
thread is blocked indefinitely, it is most often advisable to specify
a timeout for any blocking call at which time the thread will be
asynchronously awoken and will continue exeuction - this can be done
by setting a timer that is set up to throw a signal to a timeout
handler prior to making a blocking call if the API does not directly
support a timeout option.
 
# Timer Services

An interrupt handler set up by the RTOS which counts ticks on each
interval timer interrupt and signals any threads that have reached a
timeout threshold.

# Time-slice 

A unit of CPU called a quantum which can be allocated to a thread in a
preemptable best effort system - in these systems timer services often
makes a call into the scheduler on each system tick in order to
provide quantum preemption - so, the tick, a quantum, and timeout
resolution are typically all the same - e.g. Linux/Unix scheduling.
 
# Top Half (TH)

The interface presented to calling threads/tasks/processes by a
driver. The Top Half includes thread control features such as blocking
(using a semTake most often) and policy such as how many threads it
will allow to read/write a device at once. Note that Linux normally
defines the BH and TH opposite of the definition provided here.
 
# Trace

A linear buffer with records that include time (cycle count) and state
information for a processor core and/or application code.
 
# TTL - Transistor to Transistor Logic

Traditional 5v digital logic levels. Also, Time-To-Live - A counter in
a datagram that is decremented on each node- to-node hop such that the
packet is discarded when TTL=0; this prevents a packet from hopping
around the network indefinitely and creating a problem.
 
# Unbounded

When a condition can persist for a non-deterministic amount of time -
e.g. unbounded priority inversion where the set of middle level
priority interference tasks may cause the inversion to persist for an
arbitrary time.
 
# Unit Test

A test designed to validate and verify a software and/or hardware unit
that is a building block for a larger system in isolation.
 
# Utility Curve

An XY graph which shows time on the X axis between a service release
and relative deadline and shows utility or damage caused to the system
caused by service response generation.
 
# Virtual Timer

A timer which is not directly supported by a hardware interval timer,
but rather is a software tick counter that can generate a signal after
the passing of N software ticks.
 
# VoIP

Voice over IP, a protocol for transporting voice duplex audio over the
Internet protocol.
 
# Watchdog Timer

A hardware based interval timer which counts down (or up) and when it
reaches zero (or all F’s) it generates an H-reset signal causing the
system to re-boot - critical software services are expected to post
keep-alives to a system sanity monitor which normally in turn resets
the watchdog timer before it expires. If the software loses sanity,
I.e. the sanity monitor fails to reset the watchdog timer (e.g. if a
deadlock were to occur), then the idea is that the system will be able
to recover by re-booting.
 
# WCET

Worst Case Execution Time, the longest number of CPU cycles required
by a service release ever observed and/or theoretically possible given
the hardware architecture and algorithm for data processing used.
 
# Wear Leveling

A flash file system method to ensure that maximum capacity and
operational longevity is maintained in a flash device which hosts a
filesystem - since flash is divided into sectors, with each sector
having a maximum expected number of erase/write cycles, this method
attempts to keep erase counts for all sectors approximately the same
so no one sector wears out early.
 
# White-Box Test

A set of test vectors which drive specific execution paths in a
software unit by design so that the software unit test meets specific
path, statement, condition, and/or decision coverage criteria - such
tests require intimate knowledge of the software unit such as API
return codes, error conditions, and I/O ranges.

# Worst-Case Response Time

The sum of WCET, Input-Latency, Dispatch Latency, Interference, and
Output Latency for a Service Release.
 
# Write-Back

When a processor updates memory from registers or cache.
 
# Write-Through

When a processor maintains cache/memory coherency by always writing
cache and the corresponding memory location on all writes to locations
which are cached.

# Yield 

When a thread of execution gives up the CPU resource voluntarily
through a system API call – e.g. in VxWorks pause(). Yields may
include transition from executing to pending, delayed, or suspended
states. Note: In a priority preemption, a thread will transition from
executing to ready.
